
---
title: Zero waste, upcycling, recycling & composting: how to incorporate them into your lifestyle
date: "2021-09-07 T00:00:00Z"
description: "For us surfers, an intact nature should be especially close to our hearts: After all, as surfers we depend on an intact environment and especially on an intact marine habitat. Zero waste, recycling, upcycling and composting are now part of everyday life. It's not always easy to live sustainably, but with our guide we want to help you find out how you can easily integrate these things into your lifestyle."
label: "article"
featuredImage: ./images/zero-waste-upcycling-recycling-composting-guide.jpeg
featuredImageSmall: ./images/zero-waste-upcycling-recycling-composting-guide.jpeg
tags: ["lifestyle", "community"]
---

import imgCarbon from "./images/lower-your-carbon-footprint.jpeg"
import imgFiveRs from "./images/why-we-should-follow-the-5-R’s-of-zero-waste.jpg"
import ImageContainer from "../../components/blog/ImageContainer.jsx"

**Zero waste, recycling, upcycling and composting** are becoming increasingly popular conversation topics and **lifestyle choices.** While you can compost, recycle or upcycle without living zero waste, all three are components of a zero waste lifestyle which you can incorporate into your daily routine to reduce the amount of waste you’re producing with the **ultimate goal** of sending **no waste** to the landfill.

**The zero waste movement**, with its defining characteristics is still a very new trend – however, they all draw on practices from history and an overarching concept: environmentalism, which has been around for millennia.

Although zero waste started out as a governmental and organisational strategy, it was widely popularized for at-home lifestyle changes in 2013, when **zero waste guru Bea Johnson** took its principles and made them apply to your average household in her book [_A Zero Waste Home_](https://zerowastehome.com/book/). Since then, the zero waste movement as well as recycling, upcycling and composting have taken social media by storm.

# The benefits of zero waste, upcycling, recycling and composting

<ImageContainer
  img1={imgCarbon}
  alt1="A carbon footprint is the total amount of greenhouse gases that are generated by our actions."
  caption1="A carbon footprint is the total amount of greenhouse gases that are generated by our actions (©Will Walker/Unsplash)"
/>

**Living zero waste** or drawing on its defining practices, we can enjoy many different **environmental benefits,** which make the lifestyle so popular. The first consequence is, of course, the obvious reduction of waste – but this certainly isn’t where it all ends.

##  Lower carbon footprint

As we limit what we bring into our homes and reduce the need for manufacturing of new things through upcycling and recycling, we’re **reducing our carbon footprint.** It takes a lot of energy to produce new things – energy which often comes from fossil fuels in the countries where much of the world’s manufacturing is centred.

According to data from EPA, [42% of greenhouse gas emissions](https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/sources-greenhouse-gas-emissions) are caused by the production and use of goods. This goes to show how much of an **impact zero waste** and its practices can have **on the environment** in areas other than waste production.

Additionally, **composting is another way to reduce your carbon footprint.** That is because when food waste or scraps are sent to landfill, they cannot decompose properly and instead release methane into the atmosphere. Composting, on the other hand, gives them the optimum conditions they need to break down sustainably, without damaging the environment.

## Reduction of litter and pollution

**Litter – especially plastic**, is now polluting even the most remote places on our planet. Reducing the amount of waste you produce is the number one way to prevent this – the less waste there is, the less likely it is to become litter.

## A change on an individual level

**Zero waste**, in the way that Bea Johnson has presented it in her book, lets us **take charge of our environmental impact by ourselves** – without the need to rely on any government regulation or business’ responsibility.

In particular for those who have felt limited by what brands present them with or what the government regulations have achieved in the past, this can be very empowering and make us feel like **we can truly make a difference** with our actions. Especially upcycling and composting truly put you in charge of what becomes of your waste.

## Community-building

In a **world** that has become so **individualistic and self-focused**, zero waste and many of the efforts tied to it restore a sense of community in the world. It has started the spread and popularization of community projects such as **zero waste stores, community gardens** and other initiatives helping local economies and societies bloom.

Check your area for any of these – there likely is one in your vicinity, you may just not know about it! If there isn’t why not take part in establishing one yourself?

## Circular economy

Living a zero waste or low waste lifestyle, composting, recycling and upcycling your waste goes hand in hand with the principles of **circular economy** where resources are designed with their environmental impact in mind and made to be **reused or repurposed** through their lifecycle.

More and more companies are finding ways to incorporate this into their business concept and providing us with more circular alternatives, but the **simplest step** towards circular economy is **simply reusing** the things and materials you own and upcycling or recycling them!

# The 5 R’s of zero waste

<ImageContainer
  img1={imgFiveRs}
  alt1="By 2050, the oceans of our planet will contain more plastic than fish, by weight."
  caption1="By 2050, the oceans of our planet will contain more plastic than fish, by weight (©Naja Bertolt/Unsplash)"
/>

The easiest way to show how zero waste, upcycling, recycling and composting are all tied together is via the concept of **5 R’s of zero waste.** In her book, Bea Johnson has set out these basic zero waste guidelines useful for anyone who wants to go zero waste, low waste or simply reduce their environmental impact.

It makes **reducing your impact** as easy as following the list, choosing the first step that applies to your given situation.

## Refuse 

The first option is to simply **refuse** that which you don’t need. This helps you reduce directly at the source – before it enters your home. Choosing not to buy or receive something that would become waste without being used or bringing you joy is the first step. This also helps reduce the demand for wasteful items.

It’s best to start refusing plastic if you’re aiming for a zero waste or low waste lifestyle and then progressing towards other materials too.

## Reduce

If you can’t refuse it, **reduce** what you need. This poses an opportunity to rethink what are the true necessities you can’t live without – and what are the wasteful items you’re unnecessarily bringing into your home. **Become more mindful** of what you’re bringing into your home.

There is no better example of an item to reduce than fabric softener, packaged in frequently unrecyclable plastic and not offering any major benefits. On the contrary, fabric softener can actually be damaging to both your clothes and your skin. Think about other such items in your life and reduce them.

## Reuse

If you can’t refuse or reduce it, try **reusing**. We often feel as if we need to buy new items to solve a problem we are facing – while we could often just reuse what we already own. Here’s where **upcycling** comes in, as you can reuse and item by giving it a **new life or purpose.**

Clothes are an excellent example. Rather than buying a new outfit for an event, re-wear what your already own or tweak it to make it more appropriate.

Additionally, reusing also means that when you’re buying something new, you should opt for an alternative that can be used multiple times – not just once.

## Recycle

It is important to **recycle** – however, we first need to talk about what this word means. To recycle is to reform the material into a new product, which can be done indefinitely – this is the important part. Glass and metal are two materials which can be recycled indefinitely, but the same doesn’t apply to [plastic](https://www.plasticexpert.co.uk/how-many-times-can-plastic-be-recycled/) or [paper](https://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/21/science/21qna.html). These two lose quality through the process and can only be ‘recycled’ a handful of times. In fact, we shouldn’t even be using the term ‘recycling’ to describe them – the correct word is **‘downcycling’.**

Therefore, it’s best to **refuse, reduce or reuse** them wherever you’re able to. However, you may also be able to get of carboard and some other paper in the following step – by composting it.

## Rot

Lastly, we’re coming to the last important component of living zero waste living - **rotting** your food scraps (and other compostable items such as cardboard, cork, dust or leaves) in a compost, so that they’re given optimum access to oxygen and can decompose properly. In a landfill, they would [release methane and contribute to climate change instead](https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20200224-how-cutting-your-food-waste-can-help-the-climate), as we’ve discussed before.

Thankfully, you no longer have to own a large garden to compost! **Bokashi bins, worm bins,** or simply making use of a community garden are some of the best options you could try if you live in an apartment.

## The takeaway

Whether you’re planning to go zero waste in a specific amount of time or just want to get inspired to pick up recycling, upcycling or composting, **you can make a big difference** by doing so. Remember to take it one step at a time and make the journey enjoyable!
